---
layout: post
title: On Change
---

I’ve always wondered how people can expect so much permanence in their lives.
In Washington DC, where I was born and raised (and live now), change is a way
of life. People come and go. Buildings change, are torn down, are lost to time.
It’s normal.

When I lived in western Massachusetts I lived in a small town that had stayed
largely the same most of its long history. There was a historical society with
a small museum dedicated to the town. Mostly it celebrated the town’s heritage
as a center of industrial progress in the 1800s, or its rebirth into an art
mecca. But almost as important were the scars left on the town’s psyche by the
change that had happened. The most telling was the museum’s focus on a large
project in the ‘70s that tore down half of downtown in the name of progress.
They removed old victorian-era storefronts and put up brutalist structures with
efficient space and modern amenities. The town I lived in in the early 2000s
bemoaned its lost history. The change was seen as a horrible mistake, a part of
the town’s soul was lost to time.

I never quite understood why that change was so important to that mountain
town. In DC that kind of change happens constantly. I always wondered why, if
it was so bad, didn’t they just tear that stuff down and build whatever it is
they wanted instead.

DC is a city of transients. Most people who call the District home don’t
realize the change that constantly courses through it. They come for a few
years for work, work harder than they ever have in their life, and then move on
to other things. DC is a city of nerds, geeks, and workaholics. DC is a city of
hidden depth. People see the monuments and federal buildings, and don’t realize
that they’re just a small part. DC is always changing.

So for me my life is constantly changing. Change is the only constant. Change
is life, and to not change is to die. The idea of something permanent has its
appeal, but give me too much stasis and I grow uncomfortable, change my music,
my wallpaper, my watch face, my clothes. Change is oxygen.

The DCTech event I was at today was very different from those of the past -
smaller, less excited, quiet. And that’s why I felt the need to write this -
it’s changed. And I’m uncomfortable with that. I want permanence. I want what
it was. Sometimes it’s nice to have some consistency. And that’s weird for me.

Maybe sometimes change has to change too.
